All right.
Now let's talk about actions.
This was also a question that was
brought up like how do we express side
effects inside the state machine as well.
In state machine and state chart
terminology in action is a side effect.
It is something that is performed
as the result of an event.
So there's three different types of
actions that we could specify in
those our entry, exit and
transition actions.
So, one important thing to realize is
that actions don't happen randomly,
they happen always due to an events.
So for example,
if we're in the loading when we entered
the states, and
I could just add this over here.
So I'm gonna make this different color,
we could say entry load
data actually let me make
that a little bit smaller
if I can [INAUDIBLE].
There we go, so what this is saying
is that when we enter this date we
want to start loading data and
this is a side effects that happens,
this side effects might
eventually come back and
say okay here's your data it's loaded.
And then we go into the playing states.
So again, we could represent entry and
exit actions here too.
So we could say,
play audio over here because
playing the audio is a side effect.
We have to tell something
external that the audio file
actually needs to start playing and
when we're not
in this playing states we
want to pause the audio.
So this just make sure that
the behavior of not only the way
that the machine can change
its behavior based on events.
But also on what side
effects are executed,
the behavior of that is
specified through these actions.
Now, there are also transition actions and
these are actually the actions that
I would recommend you start with.
So a transition action in state machine
terminology is specified with do.
So it's not gonna look
like this in x states.
But when you're looking at state machine
diagrams, it has a do in it, and
that's how you know that
this is a transition action.
So when you're starting to specify
what side effects should happen in
when they should happen.
Like I said, I really recommend
putting them on the transition first.
So for example, when we loaded we
want to start playing the audio.
And when we pause, we wanna pause
the audio but notice that, okay.
Over here when we're paused
in the play event happens,
we want to play the audio as well.
So now look at these two events over here.
These two events are interesting because
they are doing the same thing and
it's showing you that any
transition that goes into
the playing state needs
to execute those events.
And so that's how you know that
that's actually a candidate for
having an entry event.
[COUGH] So, use entry events when
you realize that every single
transition to the states results
in that action being taken,
same thing with exit events or
sorry exit actions.
If you notice that every single
transition out of the states
results in this exit action,
then or results in this action,
then you should convert
that to an exit action.
So for example, if we have do pause
audio but we realize that anytime
that we're exiting this playing state,
this pause audio happens.
And so let me just make
another example over here.
So let's say that we're playing.
And let's say that we have this dreaded,
gonna color this.
We have this dreaded buffering events,
which we're not gonna model
in our actual state machine, but
just lets pretend it happens.
If we only have pause
audio on this pause event,
we need to duplicate it over here
because we also want to pause the audio
if it's buffering because obviously
there's no audio to play.
And so now we know this that every single
exit events, or sorry, yet every single
exit transition on the state note is going
to cause this same pause audio events.
That's a candidate for instead having
exit pause audio and removing these two.
So in summary using entry and
exit actions is a way to dry up
your state machine logic but
starts by specifying the actions on
the transitions themselves first.
Alright, so the way that we specify
these actions on the states or
the transitions is by,
here I'll add over here,
is by specifying it in line at first.
And so this is going to be the first
thing we're doing over here.
I'm going to go to the scratchpad,
okay, so
again we have our simple machine
we have our loading machine and
on success loaded let's make
this a target over loaded.
So in this state objects,
we could specify entry actions and
we could specify multiple actions as well.
So, an action can either
look like a string,
so we could say, load data,
or it could be an object.
In this way, it allows you to have
parameters, just whatever you want.
But in this case, we're just gonna have it
as a string just to keep things simple.
All right, so now,
if we go back to the homepage,
we're gonna see that it
shows loading over here,
but I also want to log the states.actions.
And so now we're going to see that
we entered the loading state and
now we have an array of actions.
Notice how it converted it to an object
over here we have a type of load data.
And that's gonna do something we haven't
specified what it's going to do yet,
but that shows us that this
action is meant to be executed.
Now, the state machine transition
function will not execute actions,
the interpreter will and that's one of
the roles of the interpreter is not only
persisting the current state,
but also executing actions too.
So if instead we change
this to an inline function.
And we say consult.log loading data.
Then you'll see here that
this loading data message
appears because we're
entering that state and
executing this action which it's
going to console dot log it out.
And so we could do the same thing for
transitions, so
I could have an action over here, actions.
And I'm just gonna do an inline action
again, and say console.logdataloaded.
Or I might do something like
assigning data which we're gonna
be doing in the future lesson.
So now it says loading data.
And if I send type success, that just
shows you the same machine is working.
Now we see it says assigning data.
And that's because it's executing
that inline transition action.
Now, you as a refactor target,
you don't have to specify
all of your actions in line.
Instead what you could do is, for
example, let's have load data,
the machine itself has a withconfig
method that allows you
to specify the implementation details of
these actions and other things as well.
So if I put actions as an object here,
and we say, load data,
And then we console.log
configured loading data.
Then we should see that this
configured loading data message shows,
and that's because it is reading
from these implementation details.
So those are the ways to specify
actions either in Entry Exit or
transition actions over here and
I do recommend that you
specified them as an array.
Because there is always the chance
that you might need to execute
multiple actions inside your transitions
or in entry or exit other states.